In today's lesson we're going to
talk about some shorthand ways to
access directories.
How to execute commands that may live
outside of your $PATH environment
variable.
And how to create and remove directories.
Directories are just Containers for
other files and directories.
In our previous lesson, we've already
covered how directories provide a tree
like structure for the file system.
Directories can be accessed by their name,
a full path, or
a couple of shortcuts that
we're going to go over next.
When working on Linux systems,
a period is often referred to as dot.
This is no different than Google dot
com instead of Google period com.
So, in Linux a single dot represents
this directory, the current directory.
Two dots represent the parent directory.
You can think of the parent directory
as being the directory above your
current directory.
The cd command provides
a shortcut as well.
If you type in cd- Enter, then you'll
be placed into your previous directory.
The directory separator in
Linux is the forward slash.
So you can think of directories as ending
in /, and often this is understood.
For example, if you cd into /home/jason,
that's the same thing as
running cd/home/jason/.
Using directory shortcuts can
make navigation easier, so
let's look at a couple of examples.
Pwd shows our present working directory.
You can type in the name of
a directory to change to it.
And it shows that we
are in that directory.
cd Is go to the parent directory.
Let's run that again.
cd ..
That takes us to /home.
And you can end directories with a /.
So cd jason is the same as cd jason/.
See what happens when we type cd.
So, the dot didn't take us any where
because dot represents this directory.
Let's do this one more time,
cd takes us to the directory above
and we can also specify a full path.
For instance cd /home/jason or
cd /home/jason/.
Let's change to another directory,
cd /var/tmp
OLDPWD, this environment variable holds
the directory that you were previously in.
So if we look at that it shows us that
we were previously in home Jason.
So if we use cd- that takes
us back to home Jason.
We've previously talked about how
the environment variable of $PATH
determines your command search path.
You can specify a command
with a full path.
You can execute commands
that are not in your path.
And if you want to execute a command
in the current directory you're in,
you'd type ./command.
So our $PATH environment variable
determines where your shell will look for
commands.
So, which tells us that if we just
ran cat, that it would run bin cat.
And we can also specify the full
path to that, /bin/cat.
And we get the same result.
However, if we want to run a different
cat, then we could do something like this.
Again, that cat will
not be executed because
home/jason/my-cat is not
in the $PATH environment.
It's not in my command search path.
Let me change directory into my-cat.
So we can remember that
dot is this directory.
Slash is a directory separator and
this is the name of the program.
And it executes.
So if you want to execute something in
your current directory just remember ./
and the name.
If you want to create a directory
you can use the mkdir command.
Now dash p is in brackets and
when I place something in brackets
that means that it's optional.
So make directory requires that you
give it a directory name to create.
However, -p is optional.
So mkdir newdir will
create a new directory.
Name newdir.
Dash p stands for parents so if we want
to create a directory structure that
is more than just one directory
deep we need to specify dash p so
that it will create
the parent directories.
For example, we could use mkdir -p 1/2/3.
That would create three
directories with one command.
One, that's one directory.
One slash two, that is your second depth,
your second directory.
One slash two slash three,
your third directory.
When you want to remove a directory,
use the rmdir command.
The rmdir command only removes
directories that are empty,
that have no file contents.
So So if you have a directory that you
want to remove it and all the files,
you need to use rm -rf
that directory name.
And that recursively deletes everything in
that directory and below that directory.
One important thing to note when you're
working at the command line in Linux,
there is no undo.
There is no trashcan that you can go and
retrieve a file that you've deleted.
When you delete something it's gone.
When you recursively delete something,
all of those files and
directories that you
recursively deleted are gone.
You can't get them back.
So just be careful when
you're using rm -rf.
Let's create a directory.
Let's try this again.
We can see that mkdir command
will not create the third
directory because its parent,
dir2, does not yet exist.
So if we want mkdir to do this
we'll need to specify dash p for
parent so
that it will create the dir2 directory.
And that worked.
Again, the rmdir command only
removes empty directories.
So, dir1 contains dir2 and dir3.
If we want to recursively remove them,
we can use rm -rf dir1.
And now that will delete dir1.
And if there were any files in
that directory they would be gone.
In this case there's only one
directory there, so dir2 will be gone.
And then all the files and
directories that are in there.
Again this deletes everything recursively.
So anything at dir1 and below will
be gone and you can't get it back.
Today we've talked about
some directory shortcuts.
How dot represents this directory.
A dot dot represents a parent directory.
While cd space dash will take you to
the previous directory that you were in.
We talked about how to execute commands
that may not live in your search path.
You can use a full path or you can use
dot slash and the name of the command to
run a command that is in the current
directory that you are in.
We also talked about how to create and
remove directories.
Practice navigating with
directory shortcuts like cd ..
to take you to the parent directory and
cd- to take you back to the directory
that you were previously in.
Also execute some
commands with full paths.
Like /bin/cat to execute cat.
Also work on creating and
removing directories.
And using rm -rf to
recursively remove directories.